2. Neoclassical response to the real duality
1. Part I: Foundations of the analysis (chapters 1-6)
2. Part II: Real competition (chapters 7-11)
3. Part III: Turbulent macro-dynamics (chapters 12-17)
2. Representing aggregate behavior
3. Aggregate relations, micro foundations, and the question of rigor
1. Analytical framework for robust microeconomics
2. Downward sloping demand curves
3. Income elasticities and Engel's Law
4. Aggregate Consumption and Savings Functions
5. Simulations: Insensitivity of aggregate relations to micro foundations
2. Statics, dynamics, and growth cycles
2. Classical and conventional national accounts
3. Production and non-production labor
2. Social and historical determinants of the length and intensity of the working day
3. Empirical evidence on the relations between work conditions and labor productivity
2. Output and production coefficient under socially determined work conditions
2. Cost curves under general conditions of the labor process
3. Implications of general cost curves for various economic arguments
1. Money commodities
2. Coins
3. Money tokens
4. Inconvertible tokens, forced currency, and fiat money
5. Banks, credit, and money
6. Essential functions of money
1. Classical theories of money
2. The basic structure of Marx's theory of money
3. The key elements in Marx's theory of money
4. Empirical patterns with respect to Marx's theory of money
2. The determination of relative prices with inconvertible tokens
1. No aggregate profit without surplus labor
2. Positive profits require surplus labor
3. General rule for measuring real economic profits
4. The puzzle of the effects of relative prices on aggregate profit
1. Transfers of value via changes in relative prices
2. The influence of output proportions on transfers of value and aggregate profit
2. Empirical evidence on operating costs of plants: Salter
3. Choice of technique under price-taking versus price-cutting
4. Empirical evidence on firm-level costs, capital intensity, and profits
5. Empirical evidence on equalization of regulating rates of profit
1. The feasible range of competitive prices
2. Economy-wide implications of the choice of technique
3. Implications of the choice of technique for the time path of the general profit rate
1. Classical views
2. Marx
3. The theory of perfect competition
4. Perfect competition requires irrational expectations
6. Austrian views
7. Marxian monopoly capitalism theory
8. Rise of theories of imperfect competition
9. Kalecki and post-Keynesian views
10. Modern classical views
2. Traditional indicators of oligopoly and monopoly power
3. Price rigidity and monopoly power
4. Profitability and monopoly power
5. Empirical evidence on profit rates and monopoly power
6. Empirical evidence on profit margins and monopoly power
7. Collusion and Profitability
2. The Fundamental Equation for Relative Price
3. Damping effects of vertical integration
1. Numerical example of effects of changes in units
3. Defining the appropriate measure of deviations
2. Time-series evidence
3. The Schwartz-Puty tests of the Ricardian time-series hypothesis
2. Numerical example
3. Fixed capital model
2. Resolving the puzzle of the distance of market prices from production and direct prices
3. Time-series evidence
2. Modern theoretical developments
3. Modern empirical evidence
3. Term structure
6. Equity prices
3. Relation of the interest rate to the price level and the profit rate
4. Implications of the classical theory of the interest rate
3. Equalization of interest rates of similar financial assets
5. Profit rate and the interest rate
3. Marx
4. Neoclassical and Keynesian theories of the level of interest rates
5. Neoclassical and Keynesian theories of the term structure of interest rates
2. Neoliberalism theory and practice
3. Proponents of neoliberalism
5. Debate appears to be about perfect versus imperfect competition
2. Two crucial premises: Comparative costs and full employment
4. Full employment
5. Summary of standard trade theory
4. Fixed versus flexible exchange rates
6. Ricardo's shift from trade undertaken by capitals to trade undertaken by nations
7. Numerical example of the Ricardian adjustment
3. The second difficulty: Trade imbalances and balance of payments
5. Regulating capitals in an international context
6. Trade balances, capital flows, and the balance of payments
7. Summary of the classical approach to free trade
1. The persistence of empirically weak theoretical models as a guide to policy
2. Empirical evidence on the relation between real exchange rates and real costs
3. Implications of the classical approach to long-run exchange rates
1. Macroeconomics as the aggregate consequences of individual actions
3. Macroeconomics, emergent properties, and turbulent laws
4. Neoclassical macroeconomics and representative agents
6. Accounting for aggregate demand, supply, and capacity
3. Pre-Keynesian neoclassical orthodoxy
2. Keynes's new formulation
3. The Hicksian IS-LM representation of Keynesian economics
4. The rise and fall of Keynesian theory and policy
1. Monetarism
2. The natural rate of unemployment and inflation in the context of adaptive expectations
3. Rational expectations and the New Classical Theory
4. Real Business Cycle Theory
5. New Keynesian economics
6. Conventional behavioral economics
2. Davidson
4. General themes in post-Keynesian theory
2. The temporal implications of the multiplier sequence
3. Credit as the fuel and debt as the consequence of the multiplier
4. The significance of a constant savings rate in Keynesian theory
5. The relation between actual and normal capacity utilization
6. The relation between expected and actual outcomes
7. Adjustment processes in a dynamic context
8. Exogenous demand in the Harrodian system and the so-called Sraffian Supermultiplier
9. Deterministic versus stochastic trends
10. Implications of the endogeneity of the money supply for interest rate theory
11. Aggregate demand and the price level
2. Endogeneity of the business savings rate
3. Profit, investment finance, and growth
4. Summary of the classical dynamic
5. Summary of the classical theory of growth
2. Kaleckian and post-Keynesian wage theories
2. Responsiveness of labor strength to unemployment
4. Determinants of the unemployment rate
1. The general Phillips curve
1. Money, banking, and Babylonia
2. Innes
3. Knapp
4. Modern Chartalism
2. Pure fiat money in classical, Monetarist, Keynesian, and post-Keynesian approaches
3. Determinate versus path-dependent price levels
5. Labor is not the constraint
7. Determinants of the growth rate of real capital
2. New purchasing power and the change in nominal output
2. Inflation in ten countries (Handfas)
4. Argentina
1. Depressions recur
2. Depressions are denied
2. Productivity and real wages
3. Impact on profitability of the suppression of real wage growth
6. The rate of profit-of-enterprise and the great boom after the 1980s
2. Other developed countries
3. Global scale
1. Perfection and imperfection
1. Lawful patterns despite heterogeneous behaviors
2. Equalization tendencies as a basis for stable distributions of wage and profit rates
3. From wage and profit rate distributions to the overall income distribution
4. Rising inequality and the class distribution of income
2. Shift Combinations and the Production Possibilities Frontier (Figures 4.5-4.6)
3. Production Function Graphs (Data for Figures 4.7-4.8)
2. The analysis is concerned with tokens which represent a money commodity
5. The excessive issue of inconvertible tokens of value merely depreciates them in relation to the money commodity
2. The velocity of circulation can vary
1. Observed versus quality-adjusted price indexes
1. Stock-flow accumulation rules for individual capital stocks
2. Stock-flow accumulation rules for fixed-weight aggregate stocks
3. New the perpetual inventory method rules for chain-weighted aggregate stocks
2. Effects on capital stock measures of alternate assumptions
3. Digression on the algebra of the perpetual inventory method
4. Effects on the capital stock of the Great Depression and World War II
5. Final measures of US corporate gross and net capital stocks
1. Theoretical procedures for constructing capital stock and depreciation flows matrices
1. Variables
3. United States
2. Structural analysis
3. Stability of the generalized multiplier
2. Derived variables